---
layout: post
title: "Make Time - Summary"
categories: Productivity
author:
- Jake Knapp (Original Author)
- Mridul (Summary)
---

# Four Lessons to learn from a design Sprint
  ## How Make Time Works
  - Why life is so busy?
    - busy wandwagon (Endless tasks)
      - busy = badge of honor
      - squeezing productivity into every minute
      - if i slow down, i will fall behind.
    - infinity pools (Endless distractions)
      - infinite supply of content.
      - always replenishing.
      - distraction kryptonite.

# HIGHLIGHT

  -   Three ways to prioritize your highlights
  	-   **Urgency**: what is the most pressing thing I have to do today?
  		-   time-sensitive, won't take ten minutes or ten hours to complete.
  	-   **Satisfaction**: At the end of the day which highlight will bring me more satisfaction.
  	-   **Joy**: When i will reflect on today what will bring me the most joy?
  		-   Learning Music,Music Theory, Productivity Classes, Confidence or Communication classes, etc.
  		-   Reading book,newspaper,
  		-   writing and journaling.
  		-   making a fun lunch,dinner.
  		-   planning arrangements, talking.

## Highlight Tactics
  -   Choose your highlight
  	-   write it down
  	-   groundhog it (do yesterday again) : I think very important.
  	-   stack rank your life
  	-   batch the little stuff
  	-   the might to-do list
  	-   the burner list 
  	-   **run a personal sprint**
  -   Make Time for your highlight
      -   schedule your highlight
      -   block your calendar
      -   bulldoze your calendar
      -   flake it till you make it
      -   just say No
      -   Design your day
          - it is really important as i have to plan everything in advance.
      -   becoming a morning person
      -   quit when you are done.


# LASER
  - If you create barriers around the busy bandwagon and infinity pools, we predict you will focus your attention like a laser beam. 
  -   Why infinity pools are so hard to resist. Also, instant gratification. 
  -  create barriers to distraction.
      -   biggest problem with me, I am unable to control my distraction.
  -   a love affair with email
  -   don't wait for tech to give back your time.
  -   Few of the useful tricks:
  	-   skip the morning check-in.
  	- turn distraction into tools
  	- reset expectations
  	- watch out for time craters.
  	- explode your highlight
  	- go all in
## Laser Tactics
  - Deep Work and rize apps for time tracking.
  -   Be the boss of your phone
  -   stay out of infinity pools
  	-   skip the morning checkin.
  		-   postpone checking the mails until 10am
  		-   postpone refreshing linkedin,youtube for evening.
  	- **block distraction kryptonite** : it sabotages our plans.
  		- litmus test for kryptonite of distraction
  			- if after spending hours/minutes you regret. Definitely, it is
  	- ignore the news
  		- avoid youtube news during lunch and even in the morning, avoid watching vlogs.
  	- put a timer on the internet
  		- switch off your wifi and put your phone in the airplane mode.
  	- watch out for **time craters**
  		- meteor created a crater and crater is 30x size of meteor.
  		- make a database for the time crater.
  		- ex: posting on linkedin and checking it frequently for the updates. 
  			- walking up everyday and instead of going to gym, watching YT videos.
  			- watching YT videos before going to bed can hamper sleep and distraction.
  		- a late night tv, might cost you an hour of sleeping and  a whole day of low energy.
  		- quick 15mins lunch also
  		- inside our brain, what happens is:
  			- we have to reload all the context into the brain before we are back in laser mode and that seems to be some extra work.
  	- trade fake wins for real wins
  		- updating a spreadsheet, replying to an email is a fake win if it helps you procrastinate on the harder but more meaningful project you chose as your highlight.
  		- checking mails always feels like an accomplishment even when there's nothing new.
  	
  -   slow your inbox
  	-   deal with the email at the end of the day.
  	-   schedule email time
  	-   a lot of email stress comes from thinking you need to constantly check and immediately respond to every new messages
  	- reset expectations
  		- I'm slow to respond because I need to prioritize some important projects, but if your message is urgent, send me a text.
  	- lock yourself out
  -   move tv a "sometimes treat"
  	-   go a la carte instead of all-you-can-eat.
  	-   don't watch the news , youtube,etc.
  -   find flow
  	-   **shut the door**
  		-   headphones and closed doors signal to everyone else that you shouldn't be interrupted
  	-   **invent a deadline**
  	-   **explode your highlight**
  		-   shifting your focus to something that your mind percieves as doable. completable task will create a real increase in positive energy,direction and motivation.
  		-   add tiny-doable to-dos help you build momentum and lock into laser mode.
  	-   **play a laser sound track**
  	-   **set a visible timer.**
  	-   **avoid the lure of fancy tools**
  		-   choosing a perfect tool is a distraction
  		-   researching and messing with fancy tools feels like work, but it usually isn't.
  	-   start on paper
  -   stay in the zone

# ENERGIZE
- If you live little like a prehistoric human, we predict you will enhance your physical and mental energy.

-   **you are more than a brain**
-   the modern lifestyle is an accident.
-   act like a caveman to build energy
-   you awaken to the roar of a saber-toothed tiger

## Energize tactics

-   Keep it moving
	-   don't have to run a marathon, **brain performs best when we are in motion**.
	-   20-30mins walk,running can reduce stress, improve your mood 
		- Running helps over here.
-   eat real food
-   optimize caffeine
-   go off the grid
	-   get woodsy
		-   be a nature walker it makes you more calmer and sharper.
	-   trick yourself into meditating
		-   meditation is just a breather for your brain.
		-   inability to focus, meditation helps in focusing.
	-   l**eave your headphones at home**
		-   give your brain some quite time to rest.
		-   **boredom creates space for thinking and focus**.
	-   take real breaks
-   make it personal
	-   spend time with your tribe, who gives more energy and happiness.
		-   think of those energy giving people
		-   go out of your way to have real conversation with them
		-   **People with strong relationships** are going to live long, healthy and fulfilling lives.
	-   eat without screens
		-   less likely to eat mindlessly
-   sleep in a cave
	-   make your bedroom a bed room
		-   keep all electronic devices out of your bedroom
	- fake the sunset
		- have dim lights in room for early sleeping and switch off bright overhead lights.
	-   sneak a nap
		-   lying down for 10-20 mins recharges your energy
		-  try NSDR 
	-   don't jet lag yourself
		-   confuses your internal clock and makes it even harder to bounce back.
- do something that makes both of you happy.

# REFLECT

-   fine tune your days with the scientific method
	1.  **OBSERVE** what's going on.
	2.  **GUESS** why things are happening the way they are.
	3.  **EXPERIMENT** to test your hypothesis.
	4.  **MEASURE** the results and decide whether you were right.
-   take notes to track your results
-   small shifts create big results
